# Activity 3.1 - Regular languages

Reference for math symbols:
https://www.overleaf.com/learn/latex/List_of_Greek_letters_and_math_symbols

## Names:
- Maria Fernanda Cortés Lozano A01026613
- Arantza Parra Martinez A01782023


## Exercises:

1. Give a recursive definition of the set of strings over $\{a, b\}$ that
    contain at least one $b$ and have an even number of $a$’s before the
    first $b$.
    For example: $aab$, $bab$ and $aaaabbabababa$ are in the set, but $abb$, $aaab$ and $aa$ are not

    _**SOLUTION:**_

I. **Basis:**

$L$ $=$ $\{b\}$ 

II. **Recursive Step: **

if $u$ $\in$ $L$ then $ub$ $\in$ $L$, $aau$ $\in$ $L$ and $ua$ $\in$ $L$



III. **Closure:** A string $u$ $\in$ $L$  only if it can be obtained from the basis using a finite number of applications of the recursive step.




2. Let $X = \{aa, bb\}$ and $Y = \{\lambda, b, ab\}$.

    a. List the strings in set $XY$

    #|string|#|string|#|string
    -|-|-|-|-|-
    $aa\lambda$ ||$aab$||$aaab$|
    $bb\lambda$ ||$bbb$||$bbab$|


    b. How many strings of length 6 are there in $X^*$?

$X^3$ $=$ $X \cdot X \cdot X$ $=$ $\{aaaaaa, aaaabb, aabbbb, aabbaa, bbbbbb, bbaabb, bbaaaa, bbbbaa, \}$



c. List the strings in set $Y^*$ of length three or less


$Y^0$ = $\lambda$

$Y^1$ = $\lambda$, $b$, $ab$

$Y^2$ = $\lambda \lambda $, $\lambda b$, $\lambda ab$, $bb$, $b \lambda$,$bab$, $ab\lambda$, $abb$

$Y^3$ = $\lambda \lambda \lambda$, $\lambda \lambda b $, $\lambda bb$, $\lambda b \lambda$,$b \lambda \lambda$, $b  \lambda b,$ $bbb$,$bb \lambda$ 


    d. List the strings in set $X^* Y^*$ of length four or less

$X^0 Y^0$=$\lambda$

$X^1 Y^1$ = $\{aa, bb, \lambda, b, ab\}$

$X^2 Y^2$ = $\{aaaa, aabb, bbbb, bbaa, aa\lambda, bb\lambda, aab, bbb, aaab, bbab, \lambda ab, \lambda bb, \lambda \lambda, \lambda b, \lambda ab, bab, b \lambda, abaa, abbb ab \lambda, abab \}$


3. Give a recursive definition of the set $\{ a^ib^j | 0 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ 2i\}$

    _**SOLUTION:**_

I. **Basis:**
The empty string $u$ is in the set, since $i = j = 0$ satisfies the unequality $0 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ 2i$.

II. **Recursive Step:** 
- If $a^ib^j$ is in the set then $a^{i+1} b^j$, as long as $0 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ 2i$

As well as:
- If $a^ib^j$ is in the set then $a^i b^{j+1}$, as long as $0 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ 2i$

III. **Closure:** A string $i+1$ or $j+1$ $\in$ the set only if it can be obtained from the basis using a finite number of applications of the recursive step.


4. Let $L$ be the set of strings over $\{a, b\}$ generated by the recursive
   definition

    **I. Basis:** $b \in L$

    **II. Recursive Step**: If $u \in L$ then $ub \in L$, $uab \in L$, $uba \in
    L$ and $bua \in L$

    **III. Closure**: A string $u \in L$ only if it can be obtained from the
    basis using a finite number of applications of the recursive step.

    **a.** List the elements in the sets $L_0, L_1, L_2$

    $L_0$ $=$ $b$

    $L_1$ $=$ $ab, bb, ba$

    $L_2$ $=$ $bb, aab, bab, uab, bba, aba, uba, baa, abb, bua$

    **b.** Is the string $bbaaba$ in $L$? If so, trace how it is produced.
    If not, explain why not.

    The string $bbaaba$ is in $L$, if we use the given recursive steps and we eliminate from the end:
    $bbaaba$
    1. To eleminata a:
    - We followed the recursive steps and when we reached $uba \in L$ we could eliminate $a$
    2. To eliminate b:
    - We followed the recursive steps and when we reached $ub \in L$ we could eliminate $b$
    3. To elimante $a$:
    - We followed the recursive steps and when we reached $uba \in L$ we could eliminate $a$
    4. To elimante $a$:
    - We followed the recursive steps and when we reached $bua \in L$ we could eliminate $a$
    5. To elimante $b$:
    - We followed the recursive steps and when we reached $ub \in L$ we could eliminate $b$
    6. Following all these steps we ended up with a valid string in $L$, $b \in L$.




    **c.** Is the string $bbaaaabb$ in $L$? If so, trace how it is produced.
    If not, explain why not

    The string $bbaaaabb$ is not in $L$ because it contains four consecutive a's and that is not valid in the language, we can have at most two consecutive a's. 


5. Prove, using induction on the length of a string, that $(w^R)^R = w$ for all
   string $w \in \Sigma$

    _**SOLUTION:**_

I. **Basis:** lenght $(w)$ $=$ $0$, then $(vw^r)^r=(v^r)^r$

II. **Inductive hypothesis:** Assume that $(vw^r)^r=(v^r)^r(w^r)^r$ for all strings $w$ of length $n$

III. **Inductive step:** Demonstrate that the same holds for strings of length $n+1$:
If $w$ has lenght $n+1$, then $w=xa$ where $x$ has the length $n$ and $a \in \Sigma $ 

$(vw^r)^r= (v^r(xa)^r)^r$

$(vw^r)^r= (v(xa))$

$(wv^r)^r= ((v x)(a))$

$(wv^r)^r= (a)((x v))$

$(wv^r)^r= (a x)(v)$

$(wv^r)^r= (a x) (v)$

$(wv^r)^r= (x a) (v)$

$(wv^r)^r= (w)(v)$



References:
AlgortithmsX. (2016). Let L be the set of strings over {a, b} generated by the recursive definition.
https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/1932222/let-l-be-the-set-of-strings-over-a-b-generated-by-the-recursive-definition

